---
title: P6.2 – A Life of Listening
permalink: /papers/p6-2-life-of-listening
---

<b>PAPER SESSION 6 - FRIDAY 27/8, 9–11am (UTC +8)</b>
	
<b>P6.2 – A Life of Listening</b>

<b>Martha Norkunas (USA)</b> A Life of Listening to Stories of Struggle and Meaning

<ul>Inspired by the American Council of Learned Society's annual lectures, "A Life of Learning" in which scholars present intellectual autobiographies, “A Life of Listening” presents three senior scholars’ reflections on their lives as oral historians: Martha Norkunas, Paula Hamilton and Indira Chowdhury. Each scholar will speak for twenty-five minutes so that they can create a meaningful life narrative about listening. Martha Norkunas’s “A Life of Listening to Stories of Struggle and Meaning” looks back on her deepening understanding of the expansiveness and limits of narrative to express profound ideas about the feelings, ideas and experiences that constitute a life history. She recounts several points of transformation in her life of listening, from her introduction to the history of daily life consciousness or les mentalités in France, to her listening to workers recount their struggles, to her decades long project to record the experiences of people of color in the U.S. Her interest in oral history began in France when she encountered it in the context of les mentalités. She returned to the U.S. to study folklore and narrative. Listening became a form of activism as she recorded the words of working class women who worked in the textile mills, and later furniture workers, looking for how they created meaning in their work, their union activities, and their communities and how they situated themselves in the great class divides and structural inequality they saw around them. Later she initiated oral history projects with African Americans as she and her students reflected on racial identity and structural racism. She began to think more about how best to teach students to listen to people who had radically different life experiences from their own and developed a series of listening exercises that profoundly changed her teaching and her practice of oral history. </ul>

<ul><b>Martha Norkunas</b> is Professor of Oral and Public History at Middle Tennessee State University. She holds a Ph.D. in Folklore from Indiana University. Norkunas’s work examines how cultural memory is represented in narrative and on the landscape, and how those representations intersect with race, gender, class and power. </ul>

<ul><b>Keywords:</b> autobiography; listening; oral history; personal narrative</ul>

<b>Indira Chowdhury (India)</b> How Listening Shaped Me as an Oral Historian: Some Reflections

<ul>I grew up listening to countless stories told by members of my extended family about the places they could never easily return to after India was partitioned in 1947. If stories created an atmosphere of listening, so did the kirtaniya-singers who came regularly to sing about Chaitanya, the 16th century saint from Bengal. The musical gatherings with these humble folk singers was perhaps my grandmother’s attempt to re-create practices she was familiar with as a child. The streets in the town I grew up in were not noisy with sounds of automobiles; one heard a medley of human voices: the songs of beggars, the shouts of higglers and cobblers carrying their awls and announcing their availability for shoe repairs. I became an oral historian rather late in life, but these diverse voices shaped my life in listening. In this paper, I offer my understanding of what the oral historian coming from a culture orality sets out to record and what she listens to in the process. Through vignettes from my experience of doing oral history, I reflect on how I have listened differently at different phases of my life and how rhythms of music, everyday speech, story-telling and responses to my interview questions have woven together my understanding of memory and history.</ul>

<ul><b>Indira Chowdhury</b> is Founder-Director of the Centre for Public History at the Srishti Institute of Art, Design, and Technology, Bengaluru. Formerly professor of English at Jadavpur University, Kolkata, she is also the founder of Archival Resources for Contemporary History (ARCH), Bengaluru, now known as ARCH@Srishti. A PhD in history from the School of Oriental and African Studies, London, her book, The Frail Hero and Virile History (Delhi, OUP, 1998) won the Tagore prize in 2001. She was awarded the New India Fellowship to work on the manuscript of her recently published book titled Growing the Tree of Science: Homi Bhabha and the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (OUP: 2016). Interested in a number of fields she has translated novels from Bengali to English, compiled the Supplement of Indian English words in the Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary (1996) and also created Archival books that bring archival material to the public. She researched and directed a book project on Asia’s oldest museum entitled The Lives of Objects: Stories from the Indian Museum (2017). Indira is a founding member of the Oral History Association of India. She was President of the Oral History Association of India (2013–2016) and President of the International Oral History Association (2014–2016). She blogs about oral history at <a href="http://theoralhistorian.com">http://theoralhistorian.com</a>.</ul>

<ul><b>Keywords:</b> autobiography; listening; oral history; personal narrative</ul>
